DOE Scientific Dataset Record
Title: Examination of stiff ion temperature gradient mode physics in simulations of DIII-D H-mode transport
Authors: ['Holland, C. [OSTI]', 'Luce, T. C.', 'Grierson, B. A.', 'Smith, S. P.', 'Marinoni, A.', 'Burrell, K. H.', 'Petty, C. C.', 'Bass, E. M.']
Date: 2022-06-09T04:00:00Z
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/HFLL1Z
Organization: ['Univ. of California, San Diego, CA (United States)', 'General Atomics, San Diego, CA (United States)', 'Princeton Plasma \r\nPhysics Lab. (PPPL), Princeton, NJ (United States)', 'Massachusetts Inst. of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA (United \r\nStates). Plasma Science and Fusion Center']
Subjects: ['70 PLASMA PHYSICS AND FUSION TECHNOLOGY']

A systematic evaluation of gyrokinetic and gyrofluid model predictions of ion temperature gradient (ITG) stability and transport using parameters from DIII-D high confinement mode (H-mode) plasmas has been performed. The nonlinear CGYRO code is used to make the gyrokinetic predictions, and the quasilinear TGLF model for the corresponding gyrofluid predictions. The assessments are made at three radii (normalized toroidal flux ρtor = 0.4, 0.55, and 0.7) in three different plasma scenarios with varying levels of neutral beam heating and torque. For each of the nine cases (3 radii × 3 scenarios) considered, ITG turbulence is found to be the dominant long-wavelength instability and transport mechanism. The inclusions of both transverse magnetic fluctuations and dynamic fast beam ions are stabilizing for all cases considered, with strongest effects seen at ρor = 0.4 where the fast ion population and normalized plasma pressure β = 2μ0nT/B2 are highest. The further inclusion of parallel magnetic fluctuations does not have a meaningful impact on the ITG turbulence in these scenarios, but does destabilize (in combination with fast ions) new high-frequency instabilities at ρtor = 0.4 in the high power scenarios. In each case the linear and nonlinear ITG critical gradients are predicted to be lower than the measured ITG scale lengths and their associated uncertainties. Inclusion of equilibrium flow shear in the transport predictions generally leads to an upshift in effective critical gradient rather than a qualitative change in the predicted stiffness, with stronger responses typically seen in the gyrokinetic predictions than in the gyrofluid results. However, in most cases these upshifted gradients still remain below the measured values and their uncertainties. Although the predicted critical gradients are below the measured gradients, both models predicted flux-matching gradients consistent with measured values in six of the nine cases considered, with no clear systematic over- or underprediction. Thus, while the experimental ion temperature profiles do not appear to be closely pinned to the ITG critical gradient, both gyrokinetic and gyrofluid models are able to accurately match the measured gradients reasonably well in most cases.

Source: DOE Data Explorer (OSTI). U.S. Department of Energy scientific dataset.