DOE Scientific Dataset Record
Title: Conifer water use patterns in the East River Watershed, Colorado US, based on stable water isotopes and cellulose isotopes
Authors: ['Berkelhammer, Max [University of Illinois at Chicago; University of Illinois at Chicago] (ORCID:000000028924716X)', 'Ritter, Francois [University of Illinois at Chicago]', 'Williams, Kenneth [Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory]', 'Carroll, Rosemary [Desert Research Institute]', 'Still, Christopher [Oregon State University]', 'Winnick, Matthew [University of Massachusetts - Amherst]', 'Anderson, Lesleigh [USGS]', 'Carbone, Mariah [Northern Arizona University]', 'Stefanescu, Ioana [University of Wyoming]', 'Insel, Nadja [Northeastern Illinois University]']
Date: 2020-01-01T04:00:00Z
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15485/1596123
Organization: ['Environmental System Science Data Infrastructure for a Virtual Ecosystem', 'Space and time dynamics of transpiration in the East River watershed: biotic and abiotic controls']
Subjects: ['54 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES', 'Cellulose', 'EARTH SCIENCE > ATMOSPHERE > ATMOSPHERIC TEMPERATURE > SURFACE TEMPERATURE > BOUNDARY LAYER TEMPERATURE', 'EARTH SCIENCE > ATMOSPHERE > ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR > WATER VAPOR INDICATORS > STABLE ISOTOPES', 'EARTH SCIENCE > ATMOSPHERE > PRECIPITATION > LIQUID PRECIPITATION > LIQUID SURFACE PRECIPITATION RATE', 'EARTH SCIENCE > TERRESTRIAL HYDROSPHERE > WATER QUALITY/WATER CHEMISTRY > ISOTOPES > STABLE ISOTOPES', 'Frost days', 'Ring width', 'Stable isotopes, ecohydrology, East River Watershed, conifers, snow', 'fossil wood', 'interglacial']

This data package contains a series of datasets aimed at understanding the seasonal origins of water used by the dominant conifer species, Abies lasiocarpa and Picea engelmannii, in the East River Watershed. There is a distinct difference in the stable isotopic ratio of summer rain and snowpack and thus by tracking the isotopic ratio of the xylem water in trees, it is possible to separate when a tree is using snow vs. summer rain. Following typical protocols, we sampled and extracted water from soils in the "Research Meadow" near Gothic, CO within the East River Watershed through the 2016 growing season. The stable isotopic ratio of these waters were then measured. Using values of the isotopic ratio of precipitation and snowpack from that season, we develop a mixing model to show how the trees transitioned from use of snowpack to summer in late July. We extended the information on the seasonal origins of water from 2016 back until 1980 by using measurements of the isotopic ratio of cellulose from trees in the Research Meadow. The isotopic ratio of tree ring cellulose records a signal both of the Vapor Pressure Deficit at the leaf-atmosphere boundary and also the source water for the trees. We concluded from this extended analysis that the trees underwent transitions between periods where snow was the dominant water source and summer rain was the dominant water source. More details on this analysis can be found in the publication: Persistence and Plasticity in Conifer Water Use Strategies. JGR Biogeoscience. DOI 10.1029/2018JG004845. The dataset specifically includes stable isotope measurements of xylem and soil water for Spruce and Fir trees at the Rocky Mountain Biological Lab's Research Meadow as well as snowpack and precipitation stable isotopes from nearby National Atmospheric Deposition Program sites. Associated meteorological data is included, which is needed to understand the source water for the trees based on the cellulose measurements.This dataset was updated in June 2021 also include intra-ring measurements of the d18O and d13C of cellulose these same species of trees at the Ziegler Reservoir site in Snowmass, CO. These are listed as files: "Interglaciald18OCellulose.csv", "Interglaciald13OCellulose.csv" and "Modernd13CCellulose.csv". The intent of these measurements was to assess whether common conifers (abies and picea) had undergone ecophysiological or ecohydrological changes during the last period in Earth's history was warmer than today, i.e. the last Interglacial (116,000 to 130,000 years ago). This site was chosen because it is a location where subfossil wood from this critical warm period was discovered. We measured the d18O and d13C of the subfossil trees following the same protocol as the modern samples which included chemical extraction of cellulose and isotope ratio mass spectrometry. We found that the trees showed little difference in water use efficiency but utilized more summer rain during the interglacial period. This analysis and detailed methods are provided in the following manuscript: Wetter summers mitigated temperature stress on Rocky Mountain forests during the last interglacial warm period which is in revision at GRL but is available as a preprint here: 10.1002/essoar.10506740.2

Source: DOE Data Explorer (OSTI). U.S. Department of Energy scientific dataset.