DOE Scientific Dataset Record
Title: Sedimentary Geothermal Feasibility in Eastern Nevada and Millard County, Utah Well Databases
Authors: ['Taverna, Nicole [National Renewable Energy Laboratory]']
Date: 2019-11-30T04:00:00Z
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15121/1637461
Organization: ['DOE Geothermal Data Repository', 'National Renewable Energy Laboratory']
Subjects: ['15 GEOTHERMAL ENERGY', 'Bacon Flat', 'Black Rock Desert', 'Blackburn', 'Diamond Valley', 'Elko Basin', 'Marys River', 'Millard County', 'N. Willow Creek', 'North Willow Creek', 'Pavant Butte', 'Railroad Valley', 'SedGeo', 'Steptoe Basin', 'Tomera Ranch', 'depth', 'energy', 'feasibility', 'formation', 'geothermal', 'permeability', 'sedimentary', 'sedimentary basin', 'temperature', 'well data']

In order to gather data to assess sedimentary geothermal feasibility in Nevada and Utah, state oil and gas and geothermal databases were serached for well files and well logs. Well data from the Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology oil and gas and geothermal databases was mined for the following areas in Nevada: Blackburn oil field, Marys River, North Willow Creek, Tomera Ranch, and Diamond Valley, all in the Elko Basin; Bacon Flat in Railroad Valley; and Steptoe Basin. For Pavant Butte in Utah, the State of Utah Division of Oil and Gas Well File and Well Log Searches were mined for well records in Millard County. Only wells close to Pavant Butte were mined for detailed information, but all Millard County wells are included in the database. Well files were searched for temperature, permeability, pressure information, and formation depth and thickness. Temperature values are uncorrected. Locations for some wells were converted from township and range locations to approximate latitude and longitude using Google Earth and Earth Point grids to locate well pads. If no well pad could be located for a well, the center of the smallest section available (usually partsect) was used as the approximate location.

Source: DOE Data Explorer (OSTI). U.S. Department of Energy scientific dataset.