DOE Scientific Dataset Record
Title: Data from: "Growth strategies and threshold responses to water deficit modulate effects of warming on tree seedlings from forest to alpine"
Authors: ['Lazarus, Brynne [U.S. Geological Survey; U.S. Geological Survey] (ORCID:000000026352486X)', 'Castanha, Cristina [Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory] (ORCID:0000000173275169)', 'Germino, Matthew J. [U.S. Geological Survey] (ORCID:0000000163267579)', 'Kueppers, Lara M. [University of California Berkeley] (ORCID:0000000281343579)', 'Moyes, Andrew B. [Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory] (ORCID:0000000291378118)']
Date: 2020-01-01T04:00:00Z
DOI: https://doi.org/10.15485/1686146
Organization: ['Environmental System Science Data Infrastructure for a Virtual Ecosystem', 'Subalpine and Alpine Species Range Shifts with Climate Change: Temperature and Soil Moisture Manipulations to Test Species and Population Responses (Alpine Treeline Warming Experiment)']
Subjects: ['54 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES', 'Aboveground biomass', 'Alpine tree line', 'Belowground biomass', 'Climate experiment', 'EARTH SCIENCE > BIOSPHERE > ECOSYSTEMS', 'EARTH SCIENCE > BIOSPHERE > VEGETATION', 'EARTH SCIENCE > CLIMATE INDICATORS > BIOSPHERIC INDICATORS', 'Ecophysiology', 'Elastic modulus', 'Estimated dry seed weight', 'Foliar area', 'Foliar weight', 'Germination dates', 'Growth', 'Harvest dates', 'Osmotic potential', 'Plant-climate interactions', 'Relative growth rate', 'Relative water content', 'Root length', 'Root mass fraction', 'Saturated water content', 'Seed weight', 'Seedling age', 'Seedling establishment', 'Soil temperature', 'Soil water content', 'Specific leaf area', 'Total biomass', 'Turgor loss point', 'Water stress', 'Water use efficiency', 'Water use efficiency as δ13C']

This data package contains data that were used to support conclusions drawn in “Growth strategies and threshold responses to water deficit modulate effects of warming on tree seedlings from forest to alpine”, by Lazarus, Castanha et al. 2017. Data were collected at field sites within the Alpine Treeline Warming Experiment (ATWE) on Niwot Ridge, Colorado, USA, and at the U.S. Geological Survey laboratory located in Boise, Idaho. This archive contains comma-separated-values (.csv) files, as well as the same files in Microsoft Excel (.xlsx) format, which can be opened by either Microsoft Excel, R, or any simple text editor program. There are two types of geospatial data files: .kml and ESRI shapefiles (.shp). The kml files contain placemarks, which can be opened by Google Earth, or Google Maps. The ESRI shapefiles can be opened by any geographic information system application that can read shapefiles, including ESRI's entire ArcGIS suite, and QGIS. We asked whether and how tree species differences in response to water deficit relates to their establishment along the gradient from forest to alpine. To do this, we compared growth and moisture stress responses in first-year seedlings of three species planted in common gardens subject to a factorial of heating and watering treatments below, at, and above tree line. This combination of an elevation gradient alongside warming and watering treatments enabled us to observe species differences in seedling responses to a broad set of climatic conditions.Entire seedlings were harvested at c. 3- and again at 9 weeks of age following germination/emergence in the experimental plots, and we then measured dry mass (DM) of above and belowground parts, root length, root mass fraction (RMF), relative growth rates (RGRs) from seed to 3 weeks and from 3 to 9 weeks, turgor-loss point (TLP), and photosynthetic WUE (as δ13C). Also included in this dataset (but not described in the manuscript) are measures of specific leaf area (SLA) and other variables generated by pressure-volume curves (saturated water content, osmotic potential at full turgor, elastic modulus).

Source: DOE Data Explorer (OSTI). U.S. Department of Energy scientific dataset.